SDD 0022 Managed Services in Cluster (#55)
projectsyn/documentation: docs/modules/SDDs/pages/0023-managed-services-controller.adoc

= SDD 0023 - Managed Services Controller

:sdd_author:    Tobias Brunner
:sdd_owner:     
:sdd_reviewers: 
:sdd_date:      2020-06-22
:sdd_status:    draft
include::partial$meta-info-table.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
To automatically manage application services indepent of where the service instance definition is coming from a managed services controller is introduced.
====

== Motivation

For automatically generating supporting Kubernetes objects to objects which define application service instances - as defined in xref:0022-managed-services-in-cluster.adoc[0022 - Managed Services in Cluster] - a new controller is introduced. This controller watches for known Kubernetes objects and generates supporting Kubernetes objects like backup schedules or monitoring configuration.

=== Goals

* Controller to enable managed services on a Kubernetes cluster

=== Non-Goals

* Define the content of the supporting objects

== Design Proposal

> A Kubernetes controller watches for a defined set of Kubernetes objects and acts when they're created, updated or deleted. The controller acts as a templating engine, meaning it can generate a list of Kubernetes object and fill in needed information in placeholders. The templates and the definition which objects to watch is defined as custom resources which configures the controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Kubernetes controller watches for a defined set of Kubernetes objects and acts when they're created, updated or deleted. The controller acts as a templating engine, meaning it can generate a list of Kubernetes object and fill in needed information in placeholders. The templates and the definition which objects to watch are defined as custom resources which configure the controller.
```

  - apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
    kind: PrometheusRule
    metadata:
      name: KafkaMonitoringRules
    spec:
      [...]
  - apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
    kind: ServiceMonitor
    metadata:
      name: KafkaServiceMonitor
    spec:
      [...]  
--

These `ManagedService` objects are delivered by the Commodore Component which installs the corresponding application instance operator. In this case the Commodore Component `component-kafka-strimzi` would deploy this matching object.

=== User Stories

==== User instantiates an application service instance

A user of the Project Syn enabled Kubernetes cluster creates a `Kafka` object and delivers it to the cluster. The controller is configured to watch these `Kafka` objects and generate a list of supporting objects to enable this service to be a managed service.

=== Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

==== Opt-Out

With the annotation `syn.io/managed=false` on a service instance object an opt-out of the managed services controller is possible. No supporting objects will be created if this annotation is set. Default is to be always enabled.

==== Controller CRDs

TODO

=== Risks and Mitigations

> We're inventing yet-another templating engine. But as there hasn't been a controller around which implements the requested feature, it has to be done this way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're inventing yet another templating engine. However, there is no established controller which implements the features required, it seems unavoidable at this time to implement our own.
```
